README.md, before:

# Linux workshop for Enterprise administrators

This workshop aims to get people with limited or no experience of Linux a good foundation to start. While it does deal with some of the theory, it focuses on hands on experience of common tasks that a system administrator likely will have to do. 

This workshop has been written specifically for people with some previous experience of the Windows operating system but works for anyone who is new to Linux.

This workshop uses ```Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8```, but acquired knowledge is often applicable for many different Linux operating systems.

# Contributions
Please note that this workshop is also an open source project. That means that anyone who wants are welcome to submit suggestions for improvements. It does not matter if you are attending the workshop or setting it up for others, please contribute improvements if you can :)

# If you are attending a workshop

Welcome, below is everything you need to know in order to get started.

## Content overview

:exclamation: Further down you will get intructions on how to get started.

```Labs:```
- **(lab0) Prerequisites**
    - Getting started with the workshop.
- **(lab1) Software management**
    - Learn the basic of software management, such as installing, upgrading and removing software.
- **(lab2) Storage management**
    - An intro to storage management, learn about management of storage devices and filesystems.
- **(lab3) Service management**
    - How to handle services? Learn the basics including starting, stopping and installing new ones.
- **(lab4) Network configuration**
    - Get introduced to the basics of managing the network of a server, including configuring network interfaces, the local firewall and troubleshooting network issues.
- **(lab5) User management**
    - Learn how to manage local and centrally managed users, including joining a server to Active Directory and creating access controls.
- **(lab6) Troubleshooting and performance tuning**
    - Learn the basic troubleshooting tricks of Linux and do some performance tuning.

```Extra assignments:```

- **(assignment1) Create image for use in the cloud or virtual**
    - Learn how to create a template image to install Red Hat Enterprise Linux in a virtual or cloud environments.
- **(assignment2) Installing MSSQL**
    - Get started with Microsoft SQL server on Red Hat Enterprise Linux
- **(assignment3) Management of several servers using web console**
    - Learn how you can manage serveral servers with less effort, using the Web console
- **(assignment4) Management of several servers using Ansible**
    - Learn how you can manage hords of servers with little effort, using the worlds most popular automation framework, Ansible.


## Getting started
To get started with the workshop. [Click here to come to the workshop index page](content/thews.md)

# Setting this up workshop for yourself or others

If you are not attending a workshop setup by others. Continue reading.

* If you want to deploy the workshop for one or several attendees on AWS, [click on this link](content/aws.md)
* And here is a [pitch](pitch.md)

Commit message:

added info on assignment 5 to readme file

README.md, after:

# Linux workshop for Enterprise administrators

This workshop aims to get people with limited or no experience of Linux a good foundation to start. While it does deal with some of the theory, it focuses on hands on experience of common tasks that a system administrator likely will have to do. 

This workshop has been written specifically for people with some previous experience of the Windows operating system but works for anyone who is new to Linux.

This workshop uses ```Red Hat Enterprise Linux 8```, but acquired knowledge is often applicable for many different Linux operating systems.

# Contributions
Please note that this workshop is also an open source project. That means that anyone who wants are welcome to submit suggestions for improvements. It does not matter if you are attending the workshop or setting it up for others, please contribute improvements if you can :)

# If you are attending a workshop

Welcome, below is everything you need to know in order to get started.

## Content overview

:exclamation: Further down you will get intructions on how to get started.

```Labs:```
- **(lab0) Prerequisites**
    - Getting started with the workshop.
- **(lab1) Software management**
    - Learn the basic of software management, such as installing, upgrading and removing software.
- **(lab2) Storage management**
    - An intro to storage management, learn about management of storage devices and filesystems.
- **(lab3) Service management**
    - How to handle services? Learn the basics including starting, stopping and installing new ones.
- **(lab4) Network configuration**
    - Get introduced to the basics of managing the network of a server, including configuring network interfaces, the local firewall and troubleshooting network issues.
- **(lab5) User management**
    - Learn how to manage local and centrally managed users, including joining a server to Active Directory and creating access controls.
- **(lab6) Troubleshooting and performance tuning**
    - Learn the basic troubleshooting tricks of Linux and do some performance tuning.

```Extra assignments:```

- **(assignment1) Create image for use in the cloud or virtual**
    - Learn how to create a template image to install Red Hat Enterprise Linux in a virtual or cloud environments.
- **(assignment2) Installing MSSQL**
    - Get started with Microsoft SQL server on Red Hat Enterprise Linux
- **(assignment3) Management of several servers using web console**
    - Learn how you can manage serveral servers with less effort, using the Web console
- **(assignment4) Management of several servers using Ansible**
    - Learn how you can manage hords of servers with little effort, using the worlds most popular automation framework, Ansible.
- **(assignment5) Container tooling in RHEL8**
    - Learn the tools we have added to RHEL8 to enable working with containers and container registries.


## Getting started
To get started with the workshop. [Click here to come to the workshop index page](content/thews.md)

# Setting this up workshop for yourself or others

If you are not attending a workshop setup by others. Continue reading.

* If you want to deploy the workshop for one or several attendees on AWS, [click on this link](content/aws.md)
* And here is a [pitch](pitch.md)
