content/assign1.md, before:

# Setup server to function in Enterprise environment

So now we are going to create a template that we can later use in your vmware environment. 

## Create a "golden image" using Image-builder
To start this out we need to add the image-builder application to cockpit. This is done at the Applications part of the menu on your left.
Locate the **Image Builder** entry and install it. It may alresdy be installed

So now click on the image to goto the Image-builder it is located below the image for the system we are using.

![button of imagebuilder](images/interface_imagebuilderbutt.png)

Once here you see the interface, there is already a few examples installed
![interface of imagebuilder](images/interface_imagebuilder.png)

So now its time to make a new image, this is done by creating a new **Blueprint** see the button in the top right corner? Press it.

![make new blueprint](images/interface_newblueprint.png)

Give your image a good name and perhaps a description of what is included or what purpose the image has.

In the filter field on your left side you can type a name of a package like bash-completion.

![filter packages](images/interface_addpackage.png)

Once you press the plus-sign next to the package name in the left column it is added to the image that is on your right. Now when we add a package all dependencies of that package is also added. This is shown also in the interface:

![dependencies of packages](images/interface_dependencies.png)

So now lets add some more packages that will make the image more useful.

We will need subscription-manager to be able to attach our subscriptions. Also openssh-server and openssh-clients will make the image much more usable since ssh is used to connect to the server remotely.

Add this list of packages:

```
audit
basesystem
bash
coreutils
cronie
curl
dnf
dnf-plugin-spacewalk
e2fsprogs
filesystem
firewalld
glibc
grubby
hostname
initscripts
iproute
iprutils
iputils
irqbalance
kbd
kexec-tools
less
man-db
ncurses
openssh-clients
openssh-server
parted
passwd
plymouth
policycoreutils
procps-ng
rhn-client-tools
rhn-setup
rhnlib
rhnsd
rng-tools
rootfiles
rpm
rsyslog
selinux-policy-targeted
setup
shadow-utils
sssd-common
sssd-kcm
subscription-manager
sudo
systemd
tuned
util-linux
vim-minimal
xfsprogs
yum
```
Once that is done please press the blue **Commit** button once and get a review of you selections. Again press the blue **Commit** button to return to the list of images.

## Add local users to the golden image

Now if you click the name of your image:

![dependencies of packages](images/interface_myimage.png)

You will get another view at the image. This is where you can add users and such to the image.

## Create image for your selected hypervisor

Continue to [assignment 2](content/assign2.md)

Back to [index](../README.md)

Commit message:

done assignement1 and 2 and started on 3

content/assign1.md, after:

# Create image for use in the cloud or virtual

So now we are going to create a template that we can later use in your vmware environment. 

## Create a "golden image" using Image-builder
To start this out we need to add the image-builder application to cockpit. This is done at the Applications part of the menu on your left.
Locate the **Image Builder** entry and install it. It may alresdy be installed

So now click on the image to goto the Image-builder it is located below the image for the system we are using.

![button of imagebuilder](images/interface_imagebuilderbutt.png)

Once here you see the interface, there is already a few examples installed
![interface of imagebuilder](images/interface_imagebuilder.png)

So now its time to make a new image, this is done by creating a new **Blueprint** see the button in the top right corner? Press it.

![make new blueprint](images/interface_newblueprint.png)

Give your image a good name and perhaps a description of what is included or what purpose the image has.

In the filter field on your left side you can type a name of a package like bash-completion.

![filter packages](images/interface_addpackage.png)

Once you press the plus-sign next to the package name in the left column it is added to the image that is on your right. Now when we add a package all dependencies of that package is also added. This is shown also in the interface:

![dependencies of packages](images/interface_dependencies.png)

So now lets add some more packages that will make the image more useful.

We will need subscription-manager to be able to attach our subscriptions. Also openssh-server and openssh-clients will make the image much more usable since ssh is used to connect to the server remotely.

Add this list of packages:

```
audit
basesystem
bash
coreutils
cronie
curl
dnf
dnf-plugin-spacewalk
e2fsprogs
filesystem
firewalld
glibc
grubby
hostname
initscripts
iproute
iprutils
iputils
irqbalance
kbd
kexec-tools
less
man-db
ncurses
openssh-clients
openssh-server
parted
passwd
plymouth
policycoreutils
procps-ng
rhn-client-tools
rhn-setup
rhnlib
rhnsd
rng-tools
rootfiles
rpm
rsyslog
selinux-policy-targeted
setup
shadow-utils
sssd-common
sssd-kcm
subscription-manager
sudo
systemd
tuned
util-linux
vim-minimal
xfsprogs
yum
```
Once that is done please press the blue **Commit** button once and get a review of you selections. Again press the blue **Commit** button to return to the list of images.

## Add local users to the golden image

Now if you click the name of your image:

![dependencies of packages](images/interface_myimage.png)

You will get another view at the image. This is where you can add users and such to the image.

![add user to image](images/interface_adduserimage.png)

Now lets add a user, click the Create User Account button

![user details](images/interface_userdetails.png)

Fill any details you like here. 

## Create image for your selected hypervisor

Once the image is done it is time to use it on your selected hypervisor. Now in the same detailed view of your image you will find a tab called Images. Please click that one now.

![make image](images/interface_newimage.png)

And click the button Create Image

![export image](images/interface_imageoptions.png)

Here you will find all available image-formats that is supported out of the box. Just select the kind of hypervisor you are targeting and then click Create. Now the image is beeing built and you can follow the process by clicking on the link **Show Logs**

![export image](images/interface_imagebuilderlogs.png)

Once the buildprocess is done you can download your image. Press the Download button to save it to disk

![export image](images/interface_downloadimage.png)


Continue to [assignment 2](content/assign2.md)

Back to [index](../README.md)
